HACKING.md, before:

Developer notes
===============

This document is for people who maintain and contribute to this
repository.


How to run tests
----------------

This repo uses [tox](https://tox.readthedocs.io/) for unit and
integration tests. It does not install `tox` for you, you should
follow [the installation
instructions](https://tox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html) if
your local setup does not yet include `tox`.

You are encouraged to set up your checkout such
that the tests run on every commit, and on every push. To do so, run
the following command after checking out this repository:

```bash
git config core.hooksPath .githooks
```

Once your checkout is configured in this manner, every commit will run
a code style check (with [Flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/)), and
every push to a remote topic branch will result in a full `tox` run.

In addition, we use [GitHub
Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) to run the same checks
on every push to GitHub.

*If you absolutely must,* you can use the `--no-verify` flag to `git
commit` and `git push` to bypass local checks, and rely on GitHub
Actions alone. But doing so is strongly discouraged.


How to cut a release
--------------------

This repository uses
[bumpversion](https://pypi.org/project/bumpversion/) for managing new
releases.

Before cutting a new release, open `CHANGELOG.md` and add a new
section like this:

```markdown
## Unreleased

* [Bug fix] Description of bug fix
* [Enhancement] Description of enhancement
```

Commit these changes on `main` as you normally would.

Then, use `tox -e bumpversion` to increase the version number:

-   `tox -e bumpversion patch`: creates a new point release (such as 3.6.1)
-   `tox -e bumpversion minor`: creates a new minor release, with the patch level set to 0 (such as 3.7.0)
-   `tox -e bumpversion major`: creates a new major release, with the minor and patch levels set to 0 (such as 4.0.0)

This creates a new commit, and also a new tag, named `v<num>`, where
`<num>` is the new version number.

Push these two commits (the one for the changelog, and the version
bump) to `origin`. Make sure you push the `v<num>` tag to `origin` as
well.

Then, build a new `sdist` package, and [upload it to
PyPI](https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/packaging-projects/#uploading-the-distribution-archives)
(with [twine](https://packaging.python.org/key_projects/#twine)):

```bash
rm dist/* -f
./setup.py sdist
twine upload dist/*
```

Commit message:

build: Use Gitlint to enforce commit message style
Both Tutor and Open edX enforce the Conventional Commits message
format as outlined in OEP-0051. Enforce that standard here as well:

* Implement commit message testing with Gitlint.
* Use the Gitlint contrib-title-conventional-commits rule
  configuration option to enforce the commit message prefixes that
  OEP-0051 defines.
* Add gitlint integration to tox.
* Add a post-commit hook that validates the most recent commit message
  with Gitlint. That way, a commit with a non-compliant commit message
  will succeed, but the user sees a warning from the failed gitlint
  run (and then has the chance to amend the commit). The reason we do
  it this way and not via Gitlint's commit-msg hook is that the latter
  requires an interactive terminal, which tox doesn't provide.
* Add a tox test that runs Gitlint on push, and from the GitHub
  Actions workflow.
* Update the bumpversion message to comply with the required commit
  message format (using the "build" prefix).

References:
https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0051-bp-conventional-commits.html
https://www.conventionalcommits.org/

HACKING.md, after:

Developer notes
===============

This document is for people who maintain and contribute to this
repository.

Commit messages
---------------

Commit messages follow the [Conventional
Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) format that is also
used by Tutor and Open edX. See
[OEP-0051](https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0051-bp-conventional-commits.html)
for details.

We enforce the prescribed [type
prefixes](https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0051-bp-conventional-commits.html#type)
to be used in commit messages via
[Gitlint](https://jorisroovers.com/gitlint/).

How to run tests
----------------

This repo uses [tox](https://tox.readthedocs.io/) for unit and
integration tests. It does not install `tox` for you, you should
follow [the installation
instructions](https://tox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html) if
your local setup does not yet include `tox`.

You are encouraged to set up your checkout such
that the tests run on every commit, and on every push. To do so, run
the following command after checking out this repository:

```bash
git config core.hooksPath .githooks
```

Once your checkout is configured in this manner, every commit will run
a code style check (with [Flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/)), and
every push to a remote topic branch will result in a full `tox` run.

In addition, we use [GitHub
Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) to run the same checks
on every push to GitHub.

*If you absolutely must,* you can use the `--no-verify` flag to `git
commit` and `git push` to bypass local checks, and rely on GitHub
Actions alone. But doing so is strongly discouraged.


How to cut a release
--------------------

This repository uses
[bumpversion](https://pypi.org/project/bumpversion/) for managing new
releases.

Before cutting a new release, open `CHANGELOG.md` and add a new
section like this:

```markdown
## Unreleased

* [Bug fix] Description of bug fix
* [Enhancement] Description of enhancement
```

Commit these changes on `main` as you normally would.

Then, use `tox -e bumpversion` to increase the version number:

-   `tox -e bumpversion patch`: creates a new point release (such as 3.6.1)
-   `tox -e bumpversion minor`: creates a new minor release, with the patch level set to 0 (such as 3.7.0)
-   `tox -e bumpversion major`: creates a new major release, with the minor and patch levels set to 0 (such as 4.0.0)

This creates a new commit, and also a new tag, named `v<num>`, where
`<num>` is the new version number.

Push these two commits (the one for the changelog, and the version
bump) to `origin`. Make sure you push the `v<num>` tag to `origin` as
well.

Then, build a new `sdist` package, and [upload it to
PyPI](https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/packaging-projects/#uploading-the-distribution-archives)
(with [twine](https://packaging.python.org/key_projects/#twine)):

```bash
rm dist/* -f
./setup.py sdist
twine upload dist/*
```
